Major overhaul of the "relationships" documentation (#4269)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/modeling/relationships.md

- Adding a primary key property to each entity type.
- Adding a foreign key property to one entity type.
- Associating the references between entity types with the primary and foreign keys to form a single relationship configuration.

Once this mapping is made, EF will change the foreign key values as needed when the references between objects change, and change the references between objects as needed when the foreign key values change.

> [!NOTE]
> Primary keys are used for more than mapping relationships. See [_Keys_](xref:core/modeling/keys) for more information.

For example, the entity types shown above can updated with primary and foreign key properties:

```csharp
public class Blog
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public virtual Uri SiteUri { get; set; }

    public ICollection<Post> Posts { get; }
}
```

```csharp
public class Post
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Title { get; set; }
    public string Content { get; set; }
    public DateTime PublishedOn { get; set; }
    public bool Archived { get; set; }

    public int BlogId { get; set; }
    public Blog Blog { get; set; }
}
```

> [!TIP]

> > Primary and foreign key properties don't need to publicly visible properties of the entity type. However, even when the properties are hidden, it is important to recognize that they still exist in the EF model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Primary and foreign key properties don't need to be publicly visible properties of the entity type. However, even when the properties are hidden, it is important to recognize that they still exist in the EF model.
```

The primary key property of `Blog`, `Blog.Id`, and the foreign key property of `Post`, `Post.BlogId`, can then be associated with the references ("navigations") between the entity types (`Blog.Posts` and `Post.Blog`). This is done automatically by EF when building a simple relationship like this, but can also be specified explicitly when overriding the `OnModelCreating` method of your `DbContext`. For example:

```csharp
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
{
    modelBuilder.Entity<Blog>()
        .HasMany(e => e.Posts)
        .WithOne(e => e.Blog)
        .HasForeignKey(e => e.BlogId)
        .HasPrincipalKey(e => e.Id);
}
```

Now all these properties will behave coherently together as a representation of a single relationship between `Blog` and `Post`.

> ## Find out more

Reviewer: Don't we have a standard title for this? Like "See more" or "Additional reading"?

Author: Maybe, although I think "Additional resources" is somewhat different. This is very directed next steps. Happy to call it whatever.

If you are new to EF, then trying the examples linked in in the bullet points above is a good way to get a feel for how relationships work.

To dig deeper into the properties of entity types involved in relationship mapping, see:

- [_Foreign and principal keys in relationships_](xref:core/modeling/relationships/foreign-and-principal-keys), which covers how foreign keys map to the database.
- [_Relationship navigations_](xref:core/modeling/relationships/navigations), which describes how navigations are layered over a foreign key to provide an object-oriented view of the relationship.

EF models are built using a combination of three mechanisms: conventions, mapping attributes, and the model builder API. Most of the examples show the model building API. To find out more about other options, see:

- [_Relationship conventions_](xref:core/modeling/relationships/conventions), which discover entity types, their properties, and the relationships between the types.
- [_Relationship mapping attributes_](xref:core/modeling/relationships/mapping-attributes), which can be used an alternative to the model building API for some aspects of relationship configuration.

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > The model-building API is the final source of truth for the EF model--it will always take precedence over configuration discovered by convention or specified by mapping attributes. It is also the only mechanism with full fidelity to configure every aspect of the EF model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The model-building API is the final source of truth for the EF model--it always takes precedence over configuration discovered by convention or specified by mapping attributes. It is also the only mechanism with full fidelity to configure every aspect of the EF model.
```

- [_Owned entity types_](xref:core/modeling/owned-entities) use a special type of "owning" relationship that implies a stronger connection between the two types than the "normal" relationships discussed here. Many of the concepts described here for normal relationships are carried over to owned relationships. However, owned relationships also have their own special behaviors.

> [!TIP]
> Refer to the [glossary of relationship terms](xref:core/modeling/relationships/glossary) as needed when reading the documentation to help understand the terminology used.

## Using relationships

Relationships defined in the model can be used in various ways. For example:

- Relationships can be used to [query related data](xref:core/querying/related-data) in any of three ways:
  - [Eagerly](xref:core/querying/related-data/eager) as part of a LINQ query, using `Include`.
  - [Lazily](xref:core/querying/related-data/lazy) using lazy-loading proxies, or lazy-loading without proxies.
  - [Explicitly](xref:core/querying/related-data/explicit) using the `Load` or `LoadAsync` methods.

> - Relationships can be used in [data seeding](xref:core/modeling/data-seeding).

Reviewer: Except that we don't support navigations yet

---
title: Relationships - EF Core
description: How to configure relationships between entity types when using Entity Framework Core
author: ajcvickers
ms.date: 02/25/2023
uid: core/modeling/relationships
---
# Relationships

> A relationship defines how two entities relate to each other. In the EF Core model, a relationship is made up from one or more foreign key properties, together with optional navigation properties ("navigations") that connect the entity types.

Author: So, we really don't. :-) All relationships, owned or not, for Cosmos or not, are represented by foreign keys in EF Core. The foreign keys may be hidden, and sometimes the principal keys may be synthesized behind the scenes, but regardless of this, in EF Core, every relationship is an FK relationship.

> A relationship defines how two entities relate to each other. In the EF Core model, a relationship is made up from one or more foreign key properties, together with optional navigation properties ("navigations") that connect the entity types.

Reviewer 2: Yep, that sounds a bit like how owned entities have a key - an interesting under-the-hood implementation detail, but are actual users out there supposed to care 😉

## Definition of terms

There are a number of terms used to describe relationships. It is not necessary to understand all these terms up-front. Refer back here as needed when reading the relationships documentation pages.

- **Dependent entity:** This is the entity that contains the foreign key property or properties. A dependent is sometimes called a "child".

- **Principal entity:** This is the entity that contains the primary/alternate key property or properties. A principal is sometimes called the "parent".

> - **Principal key:** The property or properties whose values uniquely identify the principal entity. The principal key may be the primary key or an alternate key.

Author: I agree. How about I move it to separate "Glossary of terms" page?

See the linked documentation pages for more details and examples of each of these different kinds of relationships.

### Optional and required relationships

For one-to-many and one-to-one relationships, the relationship can be either "optional" or "required". In required relationships, for the dependent(s) (child/children) to exist, the principal (parent) of the relationship _must_ exist. In optional relationships, the dependent(s) (child/children) may exist without any principal (parent). This makes optional relationships equivalent to "0..1 to 1" or "0..1 to many", although they are not referred to as such in the EF Core APIs or documentation.

> [!NOTE]
> EF does not, in general, support required dependents, where the principal entity cannot exist without its dependents. See [_Required navigations_](xref:core/modeling/relationships/navigations#required-navigations) for more information.  

## Foreign keys and navigations

> At the most basic level, EF relationships are defined by foreign keys on a dependent entity type that reference primary or alternate keys on a principal entity type. Examples of how foreign keys are used can be found in the documentation for [one-to-many](xref:core/modeling/relationships/one-to-many), [one-to-one](xref:core/modeling/relationships/one-to-one), and [many-to-many](xref:core/modeling/relationships/many-to-many) relationships. [_Foreign principal keys in relationships_](xref:core/modeling/relationships/foreign-and-principal-keys) covers more specific information about how foreign keys map to the database.

Author: See previous comment.

## Cascade deletes and deleting orphans

Cascading deletes and automatic deletion of orphans are configured by convention for required relationships. Examples showing how to change the cascading behavior are included in the documentation for [one-to-many](xref:core/modeling/relationships/one-to-many), [one-to-one](xref:core/modeling/relationships/one-to-one), and [many-to-many](xref:core/modeling/relationships/many-to-many) relationships.

See [_Cascade Delete_](xref:core/saving/cascade-delete) for more information on how cascading behaviors work in `SaveChanges` and `SaveChangesAsync`.

> ## Owned entity types

Author: Good question. @AndriySvyryd?

> ## Owned entity types

Reviewer: I think keeping it as a separate page still makes sense.

Aggregates of entity types cane be defined using a special type of "owning" relationship that implies a stronger connection between the two types than the "normal" relationships discussed here. Many of the concepts described here for normal relationships are carried over to owned relationships. However, owned relationships also have their own special behaviors, which are covered in the [owned entity types](xref:core/modeling/owned-entities) documentation.

> ## Relationships across context boundaries

Author: I'm thinking that there needs to be a simpler, basic Overview/Intro page, and then a lot of the content here can be in something like a "Find out more" page.
